HIP: Introduction of Blocks (#415)
hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-0000-introduction-of-blocks.md

1. The Smart Contracts Service to have the context of a `number` and the `hash` of the current block while running the EVM bytecode.
2. Mirror Nodes to have the information in order to implement standard JSON RPC endpoints and be able to answer queries such as:
    1. Getting current block number
    2. Getting block by hash/number
    3. Getting a list of transactions for a block by number/hash
    4. Getting logs based on block number filtering

**Design Goal #1 Minimize Changes**

The Block concept should fit naturally into the existing processes, mechanisms and state updates. It must keep the same responsibilities between consensus, services and mirror nodes.

**Design Goal #2 Lightweight**

The Block concept must not add a lot of complexity and performance overhead to the processing of transactions. It must have minimal impact on the TPS of the network.

Based on the described design goals above, the outlined specification defines that block properties are to be computed and populated at different points in time and by different components of the network, based on their responsibility.

## Specification

**Definitions**

> - `block` → `Record file` containing all `Record Stream Objects` grouped in a 2-second time frame.

Reviewer: I think an extra 4 or 8 byte every 2 seconds is not a lot of information. The suggestion by either you or Danno during the initial json-rpc investigation was `Have the services node expose the chainId and for the mirror node to provide it through its API`. If the mirror node should expose it via its blocks API it would be best if it was directly associated with each block instead of in a separate file.

Also, I think it might be useful for security reasons to have the chain/leader ID in the block. It can provide an extra level of verification that mirror nodes configured to talk to mainnet will reject non-mainnet blocks.

> - `block` → `Record file` containing all `Record Stream Objects` grouped in a 2-second time frame.

Reviewer 2: The chainId is the same for the duration of the network. We definitely would not want to resend that in every block. In the (hopefully not distant) future of BLS the ledger ID will literally be the key that signed the block, so it will be included by necessity.

- `block number` → consecutive number of the `Record file` that is being incremented by `1` for every new `Record file`. This value can be initially bootstrapped through `Mirror Nodes` and after that maintained by services nodes.

> - `block hash` → The `32 byte keccak256 running hash` of the `Record file`. That is the running hash of the last `Record Stream Object` from the previous `Record file`.

Reviewer 3: Platform currently supports only a SHA-384 (SHA-2) running hash; switching to keccak256 would have significant ripple effects for mirror nodes I think.

Author: The HIP has been updated to use a 32 byte prefix of the running hash

- `block timestamp` → Instant of consensus timestamp of the first `transaction`/`Record Stream Object` in the `Record file`.

### Platform

> Adapt `TimestampStreamFileWriter` to include `blockNumber` in the `Record File`. Introduce a new field `firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile` to be used as a marker when to start a new Record file. Use the field `lastConsensusTimestamp` to keep track of the last-seen consensus timestamp that was processed. In this way, we can ensure that we have at least `1000ns`  difference between the last processed transaction before a new file is created. In this way if we have a `parent transaction` with at least one `child precompile transaction` they all will be included in the same `block`/`Record file`. Otherwise, we might have a corner case where a `parent transaction` is included in one block, and its `child precompile transaction` falls into the next block since it will increase the `consensus timestamp` with `1ns`. Therefore, the algorithm for checking whether to start a new file would be the following:

Reviewer 4: What is the unit of `firstConsensusTime` and `lastConsensusTimestamp`?  seconds, milli?  micro?  nano? The math implies nano but we should be explicit about it.

A new `Record Stream Object` enters `addObject(T object)` in `TimestampStreamFileWriter`. It has a consensus timestamp `T`. We create a new file only if both (1) and (2) conditions are met:

1. `T - lastConsensusTime > 1000ns`
2. `T - firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile > 2s`

or

if `lastConsensusTime` or `firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile` is `null`

### Services

Services is to update the processing logic of transactions so that it supports logic for determining new 2-second periods, increment `block` number and keep `block` relevant data.

> The proposed solution specifies a `long` field to be used for the block number counter, incremented every 2 seconds.

Reviewer 4: If we are going to not spell out 2 second blocks I think we need some rationale whu 2^63 is enough and 2^31 isn't for a block counter.

> Using a signed 32-bit int would result in the block number rolling over in 140 years for the initial 2 second length. Sub-second block lengths would exhaust that number well within the operational lifetime of typical networks.  A signed 64 bit integer provides a much longer timeframe.

**Pseudo-code of the record streaming algorithm**

```markdown
Properties in State:
- blockHashes `map(number -> keccak256(RunningHash))` - stores the hashes of the last 256 blocks
- blockNumber `long` - stores the current block number
- blockTimestamp - `Instant` - stores the timestamp of the block

handleTransaction() {
	...
	bool `newBlock` = shouldCreateNewBlock() {

> 			if (`currentTS` - `lastConsensusTime` > `1000ns` && `currentTS` - `blockTimestamp` > `2s`) return `true`; else `false`

Reviewer 4: `>=` - greater than or equal? Either this would cause 3 second blocks or a slow drift away from two seconds.  Perhaps express it as a modulus of the preferred block time? Or we consider the floors of the current and block timestamp to be >= 2?

Author: We are considering that the minimum period of time for a block to be created is `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds, which currently is set to `2 seconds`. If there is no transaction coming in, record files are not getting exported, thus blocks are not created.

I am not sure that I understand the first part of your comment.

	}
	if (`newBlock`) {
			`blockHashes[blockNumber] = keccak256(runningHash)` // `runningHash` is stored in `RecordStreaming`. It is a running hash of the last processed RSO
			delete `blockHashes[blockNumber - 256]`
			`blockNumber++`
			`blockTimestamp = currentTS`
	}
	processTransaction(tx)
	...
}

Migration:
`blockNumber = bootstrapLastBlockNumber`, where `bootstrapLastBlockNumber` is a system property added on startup.
`blockTimestamp = bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp`, where `bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp` is a system property added on startup.
```

`number`, `timestamp` and `hash` (map of the 256 most recent blocks) must be available during transaction execution since the following opcodes are to be supported as per the EVM specification:

- `BLOCKHASH` → Accepts the block `NUMBER` for which to return the `hash`. Valid range is the last `256` blocks (not including the current one)
- `NUMBER` → Returns the current block number
- `TIMESTAMP` → Returns the unix timestamp of the current block

**Record File**

> Record files are to be updated with a new property appended at the end of the `version 5` record files. The property will be encoded after the `End Object Running Hash` and will be `long` `blockNumber`. It is required for `services` to propagate this property to `mirror nodes` since there are `partial mirror nodes`, that don’t keep the full history from the `first record file`. Due to that, they are unable to calculate the `block number`, thus all other `block properties`.

Reviewer 4: Yea, I'm not sure if restating prior record files is a good plan.  Could we ship a table that could be used against old data?  Mapping record file hash to "canonical" block numbers?

> Record files are to be updated with a new property appended at the end of the `version 5` record files. The property will be encoded after the `End Object Running Hash` and will be `long` `blockNumber`. It is required for `services` to propagate this property to `mirror nodes` since there are `partial mirror nodes`, that don’t keep the full history from the `first record file`. Due to that, they are unable to calculate the `block number`, thus all other `block properties`.

Reviewer: My comment isn't about the migration path of older files, but how to structure new record files so as to contain a block number. I do agree for migration of old files that a mapping file would be useful.

> Record files are to be updated with a new property appended at the end of the `version 5` record files. The property will be encoded after the `End Object Running Hash` and will be `long` `blockNumber`. It is required for `services` to propagate this property to `mirror nodes` since there are `partial mirror nodes`, that don’t keep the full history from the `first record file`. Due to that, they are unable to calculate the `block number`, thus all other `block properties`.

Author: I've updated the section to include a version change to the record file stream

Block `hash` and `timestamp` will not be included in the record files, since `block hash` is the `keccak256(End Object Running Hash)` and `timestamp` is `1st Record Stream Object`'s consensus `timestamp`.

With the introduction of the new version of `Record Stream Object`s, the respective libraries for state proofs must be updated:

- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof)
- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go)

### Mirror Nodes

Based on the updates specified above, the record stream objects will pass all the necessary information for Mirror Nodes to build `Record files`/`blocks` and store enough data about them to be able to answer all block related queries outlined above. To do this they will need to collect the `number`, `hash` and `timestamp` specified in the `Record file`. For old record files, they will be derived through a migration process as specified below.

**Historical State**

> `Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. In order to be able to answer historical queries, `mirror nodes` will need to iterate over the existing/already imported record files since genesis, assign the corresponding `block number`, `hash` and migrate their DB collections such that they are able to answer queries of type:

Reviewer 4: Is a file containing the block hash to block hashings out of the question?  It's a one time item after we switch over to storing the hashes in-stream.

> `Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. In order to be able to answer historical queries, `mirror nodes` will need to iterate over the existing/already imported record files since genesis, assign the corresponding `block number`, `hash` and migrate their DB collections such that they are able to answer queries of type:

Reviewer: True, I like the file idea better. Forgot you had mentioned that. We can even store that in the mirror node classpath for each public network.

> `Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. In order to be able to answer historical queries, `mirror nodes` will need to iterate over the existing/already imported record files since genesis, assign the corresponding `block number`, `hash` and migrate their DB collections such that they are able to answer queries of type:

Author: @shemnon can you elaborate more on the `block hash` to `block hashings` file idea? (We can discuss it on a call if it requires a lot of build-up / context)

> `Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. In order to be able to answer historical queries, `mirror nodes` will need to iterate over the existing/already imported record files since genesis, assign the corresponding `block number`, `hash` and migrate their DB collections such that they are able to answer queries of type:

Reviewer: @Daniel-K-Ivanov Mirror node will be implementing such a mapping to correct partial mirror node block numbers even before this HIP goes live. I've detailed the algorithm in our [ticket](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/issues/3543#issuecomment-1092940604).

> `Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. In order to be able to answer historical queries, `mirror nodes` will need to iterate over the existing/already imported record files since genesis, assign the corresponding `block number`, `hash` and migrate their DB collections such that they are able to answer queries of type:

Author: I've updated the section to reflect the description as per the ticket

| --- | --- | --- |
| number | Services | Stored in services state (only the current number) and exported in the record stream. It is the consecutive number of the record file that is being incremented by 1 for every new record file. The number will be initially set in services through the bootstrapping process. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the NUMBER opcode; 2) as a new property in the record file and ingested by mirror nodes. |
| timestamp | Services | Stored in services state (only the last block timestamp) and computed by services. It is the consensusTimestamp of the first transaction in the record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the TIMESTAMP opcode; 2) implicitly exported in the record file through the TS of the first transaction in the record file. |
| hash | Services | Stored in services (last 256 blocks). It is the keccak256(runningHash) of the previous record file. That is the running hash of the last record stream object from the previous record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the BLOCKHASH opcode; 2) In the record file as the End Object Running Hash |

> | baseFeePerGas (??) | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). It is a hex encoded value of the gas pricing based in the FeeSchedule file. |

Reviewer 4: The meaning of this particular field however deals with EIP-1559 fee burn, which we don't do.
```suggestion
| baseFeePerGas | Mirror Node | Always zero, since there is no EIP-1559 style floating block capacity fees in Hedera. |
```

>   | difficulty | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex encoded 0 |

Reviewer 4: This should be some function of the block size and gas throttle, as it represents the theoretical max not the actual.
```
| gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The gas throttle limit per second multiplied by the target block time. |
```

  | extraData | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Nodes(s) to 0x |

>   | gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the gasLimit values for all ContractLocalCall, ContractCall and ContractCreate transactions within the block. |

Reviewer: `ContractLocalCall` won't appear in the record stream as it does not contribute to consensus. Same comment for other references to it.

Reviewer 4: This should be some function of the block size and gas throttle, as it represents the theoretical max not the actual.
```suggestion
  | gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The gas throttle limit per second multiplied by the target block time. |
```

Author: Do mirror nodes have the necessary information to compute that? @tinker-michaelj do we export throttle configurations in any way currently and if we do, @steven-sheehy do you know whether they are ingested by mirror nodes?

Reviewer: The gas throttles are available in network file 0.0.121 app.properties, but only if overridden. So in practice, no, they're not available to mirror node since they're not usually overridden.

Author: I've updated the HIP with an Open Question related to the initial "feed" of the values.

  | gasUsed | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the gasUsed value for all ContractLocalCall, ContractCall and ContractCreate transactions within the block. |

>   | logsBloom | Mirror Node | (???) |

Reviewer 4: My thought is we don't implement it and see if people notice.  We can calculate it on the mirror node if we have all the logs for the transaction.
Here's java code that calculates it for Besu - https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/blob/fd961d5296212568f9c82e7e2d5604a965e69a56/evm/src/main/java/org/hyperledger/besu/evm/log/LogsBloomFilter.java#L110

  | miner | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by the Mirror Nodes to the 0.0.98 address in the long zero prefix format.  |
  | mixHash | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to 0x |
  | nonce | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0 |

>   | parentHash | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The hash of the parent block. |

Reviewer: It's not computed, it's just the previous block's hash.
```suggestion
  | parentHash | Mirror Node | The hash of the previous block. |
```

>   | receiptsRoot | Mirror Node | (???) |

Reviewer 4: This is where we could put our sidecar hash.

  | sha3Uncles | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array (0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347) |

>   | size | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the bytes of all transaction(s) of type ContractLocalCall, ContractCall and ContractCreate within the block. transaction is the transaction specified in the RecordStreamObject and not the Transaction Record |

Reviewer 4: I think we don't populate this or return it.  It is supposed to be the size of the Ethereum block as a whole.

Reviewer: I think it would actually be the file size of the record file, which would be trivial to calculate and store.

Author: updated it with @steven-sheehy 's suggestion

>   | stateRoot | Mirror Node | (???) |

Reviewer 4: I'd leave it out for now.  There may be some value from state proofs we want to put in there in the future.

  | totalDifficulty | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Nodes(s) to hex-encoded 0 |

>   | transactions | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s) by ingesting the record stream and aggregating RecordStreamObjects of type ContractLocalCall, ContractCall and ContractCreate within the block. |

Reviewer: Believe precompiled contracts would also be included.

Author: I think that we should consider precompile contract calls as `internal` transactions to the parent one as @shemnon mentions.

>   | transactionsRoot | Mirror Node | (???) |

Reviewer 4: This is related to the ethereum consensus calculations and I think we could drop it or echo the block hash, since it is the running transaction hash.

Author: updated the HIP to set the block hash

## Reference Implementation

Initial POC in `services`:

- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/commit/04501de76f3e649b3f741dd2453c05e2631e7393#diff-1ca5738f0fe42a25f91d641aea2104dd51bec20398ce6c2aa18afde3d5a590d9R417](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/commit/04501de76f3e649b3f741dd2453c05e2631e7393#diff-1ca5738f0fe42a25f91d641aea2104dd51bec20398ce6c2aa18afde3d5a590d9R417)

## Rejected Ideas

Two iterations were conducted prior to settling on this approach.

1. Rounds as blocks - the first iteration was proposing that each block is the `consensus round`. It became clear that this approach is not suitable as it implied that multiple blocks are to be issued per second. That would add additional load to infrastructure providers when clients are iterating and going through blocks to query for data.
- Events - the second iteration suggested that `consensus events` are to be defined as `blocks`. The proposal had a much higher cognitive load (1 block = 1 record file is easier to grasp) and it required more changes to the `platform` in order to be implemented. To add on top of that, the same drawback as the `high frequency` blocks was present as well.

## Open Issues

> - What will be the considered `baseFeePerGas` property for blocks? There are different pricing for `Create`, `Call` and `LocalCall` transactions.

Reviewer 4: I think we lock it in at zero until we need to use it.  This is a congestion related aspect of Ethereum's block production process (Specificallt EIP-1559), which we don't do.

			if (`currentTS` - `lastConsensusTime` > `1000ns` && `currentTS` - `blockTimestamp` > `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod`) return `true`; else `false`
	}
	if (`newBlock`) {
			`blockHashes[blockNumber] = keccak256(runningHash)` // `runningHash` is stored in `RecordStreaming`. It is a running hash of the last processed RSO
			delete `blockHashes[blockNumber - 256]`
			`blockNumber++`
			`blockTimestamp = currentTS`
	}
	processTransaction(tx)
	...
}

Migration:
`blockNumber = bootstrapLastBlockNumber`, where `bootstrapLastBlockNumber` is a system property added on startup.
`blockTimestamp = bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp`, where `bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp` is a system property added on startup.
```

`number`, `timestamp` and `hash` (map of the 256 most recent blocks) must be available during transaction execution since the following opcodes are to be supported as per the EVM specification:

- `BLOCKHASH` → Accepts the block `NUMBER` for which to return the `hash`. Valid range is the last `256` blocks (not including the current one)
- `NUMBER` → Returns the current block number
- `TIMESTAMP` → Returns the unix timestamp of the current block

**Record File**

> Record file version is to be updated to `6`. New `long` property is to be encoded after the `End Object Running Hash` 

Author: Defining the record file migration to protobufs seems like a standalone HIP. We have started working on HIP-435 (Record Stream V6) which would include the protobuf definition of record files and the side car files that will be exported.

and will be `long` `blockNumber`. It is required for `services` to propagate this property to `mirror nodes` since there
are `partial mirror nodes`, that don’t keep the full history from the `first record file`. Due to that, they are unable
to calculate the `block number`, thus all other `block properties`. Block `hash` and `timestamp` will not be included in

> the record files, since `block hash` is the `keccak256(End Object Running Hash)` and `timestamp` is 

Author: updated

| hash | Services | Stored in services (last 256 blocks). It is the 32 byte prefix of the runningHash of the previous record file. That is the running hash of the last record stream object from the previous record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the BLOCKHASH opcode; 2) In the record file as the End Object Running Hash |
| baseFeePerGas | Mirror Node | Always zero, since there is no EIP-1559 style floating block capacity fees in Hedera. |
  | difficulty | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex encoded 0 |
  | extraData | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Nodes(s) to 0x |
  | gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The gas throttle limit per second multiplied by the target block time. |
  | gasUsed | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the gasUsed value for all ContractCall and ContractCreate transactions within the block. |

>   | logsBloom | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array

Author: updated

(`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`) |
  | miner | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by the Mirror Nodes to the 0.0.98 address in the long zero prefix format.  |
  | mixHash | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to 0x |
  | nonce | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0 |
  | parentHash | Mirror Node | The hash of the previous block. |
  | receiptsRoot | N/A | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array 
(`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`). It is expected to be used and populated in the future once traceability work is finalised.  |
  | sha3Uncles | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array (`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`) |
  | size | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The size of the record file. |

>   | stateRoot | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array (`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`) |

Reviewer: Why SHA3 empty array for this and `receiptsRoot` instead of `0x` like `extraData`? It makes sense for `sha3Uncles` since it's a SHA3, but shouldn't these others just be empty array `0x`?

Author: updated
